---
title: Vacuum for 2018-W10
date: 2018-03-10
---
Every so often I sit with a cup of coffee and write a few words.
Mostly these days those words are paid for and limited to a narrow
focus, but for this particular exercise I'm writing about whatever
I want to write about for myself. 

A goal, not an unreasonable goal, is to be able to crank out 1000
words every week. I do this for work in a single setting weekly,
and send it out on a newsletter and blog. I question whether a
similar pace would be both attainable and desirable as a personal
goal as a "blog" or a "newsletter" or whatever.

This copy of this newsletter is available wherever you find it.
You'll probably find this if you look at https://github.com/vielmetti/vacuum 
and I'll do my best to emit something once a week.

Edward Vielmetti, Ann Arbor MI

#### In this issue

* Too much coffee, man
* Municipal water rates
* Word count in the current buffer
* Process for filling out a newsletter
* unvarnished self-expression
* The last blogger left standing
* Broccoli raab with cannelini beans and polenta

### Too much coffee, man

Too Much Coffee Man started as a one-page ongoing strip running in The Daily Texan in 1991.

http://www.tmcm.com/tmcm

I've been drinking a lot of coffee (more than my doctor
would probably recommend).

### Municipal water rates

How do you set water rates so that they generate enough funds
for what will be expensive renewals of aging infrastructure,
yet not so high that they price people out of their homes?

This was the discussion with Jack Eaton and Ann Bannister at
the Food Coop this morning. It's a hard set of questions to
answer since the data for making those decisions really isn't
there ready at hand.

People don't have a lot of feedback about the amount of water they
are using. It would be interesting to display current and monthly
water use, based solely on the city's API (or direct measurment of
the water meter in the home), on some kind of sign in the living room
of a home.

Even if people use less water, the rates overall are based on
the cost of total system capacity, and not so much incremental
usage. Sure, there are some cases where you want to discourage
extraordinary use, but the main part of the bill is the privilege
of having a tap.

### Word count in the current buffer

g^g gives you word count in the current buffer in vim.

This little ditty updates the word count once you stop typing.

:au CursorHold * exe "normal g\<c-g>"
:au CursorHoldI * exe "normal g\<c-g>"

There's no one real good way to do it - the Stack Overflow item
has half a dozen suggestions - this is the shortest one of those.

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/114431/fast-word-count-function-in-vim

### Process for filling out a newsletter

Tweet for a week, or retweet whatever catches your eye.
Review your tweetstream once a week, or more frequently
if you have more to say on that channel.

For each tweet that's still notable a week hence, write a one-line
summary, and capture the URL. This might be a restatement
of the tweet or a complete rethought of a broader issue.

For each summary, write a short paragraph of exposition, and capture
any additional URLs. You're looking to get beyond the one-line
limit and expand the prose to fill a bigger space.

After this outline is filled out, expand with more words.
This effort is just about guaranteed to give you 1000 words
any time you want or need 1000 words, just by either covering
more ground or getting more depth per individual entry.

There's an opposite way to do this. Write the newsletter first, and
only then when it's done tweet out the high points. If the second
review of the tweet doesn't meet your standards, don't bother with
it. Once your standards are high enough you won't need to ever tweet
again.

### unvarnished self-expression

The internet used to be a place to express yourself and discover
what you are interested in, but now it's more of a dossier that
others use to discover who you are before judging you.

Eternally Vigilant: Free Speech in the Modern Era - Page 86

Lee C. Bollinger, Geoffrey R. Stone - 2002

"Despite the real satisfactions of forbidden inquiry and unvarnished
self-expression, the path of pleasure more frequently lies in the
direction of going along."

Even people who known nothing about the characteristics of
varnish use the term "unvarnished" accurately.

### The last blogger left standing

Jason Kottke's weblog kottke.org is the last weblog left
standing. What once was a blossoming forward with thousands
of participants in a deeply internetworked, distributed,
creative environment has almost completely disappeared. 
It has been replaced by corporate social media like Facebook
and Twitter and Instagram.

I gave up on my weblog Vacuum a few years ago - it was just
too hard a format to express a clear Presentation of Self.
What was a passing interest got reinterpreted as a statement
of self-identity, and in the end, the search algorithms only
displayed a handful of pages that I wouldn't have picked myself
as a statement of who I am.

Blogging takes time, focus, intensity, and above all funding.
The time spent putting together a cabinet of curiousities can
be better spent in narrow contemplation of a single issue.
I still write for myself, but it's so hard to even think
what building an audience for a general collection of
miscellany would look like at this stage of the network's growth.

### Broccoli raab with cannelini beans and polenta

A nice simple dish that made a nourishing dinner. I added a few
red pepper flakes for flavor, and there was plenty of olive oil.
The polenta was good with cheese, and one of the picky eaters
in the house had red sauce with the polenta.
