---
title: Vacuum newsletter for 2018-W16 April 22
date: 2018-04-22
author: Edward Vielmetti
---

"Vacuum" is a newsletter for Ann Arbor, published
weekly by Edward Vielmetti.

#### In this issue

* Ann Arbor: Archie the dog is found
* Ann Arbor City Council: Old Y Lot vote on Monday, April 24 in special session
* Ann Arbor Community High School lockdown
* Ann Arbor real estate: "The George" receiver's report
* Michigan basketball: accident report from NTSB for March 2017 crash
* Marquette: Word on the Street newsletter
* (name), Ontario: Earthquake, did you feel it?
* Books: Get Momentum, Jason and Jodi Womack
* Obituary: Charles Gelman
* Recipe: Garlic Mustard

(dog photo)

### Ann Arbor: Archie the dog is found

On (date), Archie the dog left home on the run. His owner, (name),
posted a plea for help to Twitter. The message was relayed by
(name) to a neighborhood group on NextDoor, and from there it
was reposted to other neighborhoods as Archie was spotted heading west.

The happy news is that Archie was found and reunited with his
owner, with a sore tooth and some (injuries) for his troubles
in a journey that took him three miles from home.

(name)'s tweet got over (number) tweets and retweets from people
all over the globe, and Nextdoor got the message to the eyes on
the street near where Archie was spotted. 

* (archie)

### Ann Arbor City Council: Y Lot vote on Monday, April 24 in special session

The Ann Arbor City Council will again take up the issue of
exercising its option to repurchase the Old Y Lot (350 S Fifth)
from owner Dennis Dahlmann. Council had considered this issue
in its regular session of Monday, April 17, but postponed the
vote an extra week in the interest in reaching a settlement of
the lawsuit Dahlmann v City of Ann Arbor.

* (documents)

### Ann Arbor Community High School lockdown

On Friday, April 20, students at Community High School went into
lockdown after two unknown individuals entered the school. The
all-clear was given at (time) after the Ann Arbor Police Department
was called to investigate.

* (documents)

### Ann Arbor real estate: "The George" reciever's report

The property formerly known as as "Packard Square", now "The George",
went into receivership on (date) after developer Craig Schubiner failed
to make adequate progress and lost the backing of his lenders. Ann Arbor's
McKinley was appointed receiver by (judge) of (court). 

The court requires that McKinley make periodic reports on progress,
and the (date) report is available. It notes (events) and (milestones),
and reports that (conclusion).

* (documents)

### Michigan basketball: accident report from NTSB for March 2017 crash

The Detroit News first reported on the National Transportation Safety
Board's preliminary findings in the crash following an aborted
takeoff of a charter airplane carring the University of Michigan men's
basketball team on a (date) trip to Washington, DC for the Big Ten
tournament. 

The News read through the (number) pages in the report
and highlighted the good judgement of (pilot), who decided
in a split second to (abort) the takeoff, even though the
plane was above the (maximum speed for liftoff). Though he
violated well-established aviation protocol in this incident,
(pilot's name) decision may well have saved many lives. The
accident led to one injury and no fatalities as the plane
slid off the end of the runway.

* (contempoary accounts)
* (document)
* Detroit News story

### Marquette: Word on the Street newsletter

In other civic newsletters:

Word on the Street is a regular newsletter by former newscaster
(name) who writes about the goings on in Marquette, Michigan
in the Upper Peninsula. The coverage is informal, a bit gossipy,
and crucially it fills a news hole left by the continuing shrinkage
of the long-time daily newspaper (The Mining Journal).

In a recent issue, (name) writes about (topic, topic, and topic). 
The publication has a smattering of advertising. A Marquette
resident who I saw at Farmer's Market today visiting their sister
who lives in Water Hill talked to me about it at market, comparing
it with this newsletter and suggesting that if I wanteed a bigger
audience for this publication that I should "dumb it down" a bit.

* Word on the Street, Facebook
* Word on the Street, blog

### (name), Ontario: Earthquake, did you feel it?

A (magnitude) earthquake hit (city), Ontario, about (distance) from Ann Arbor,
on (precise date and time). The quake was felt by some from
Sarnia to Pinckney to Cleveland, and was widely reported on
the Detroit (evening news).

Did you feel it? I didn't, but a friend in Windsor, Ontario did,
and she reported that (characterization of shaking and sound).

* USGS map
* Windsor newspaper coverage
* Quote from Sue Braiden

### Books: Get Momentum, Jason and Jodi Womack

Author Jason Womack of Ojai, California visited Ann Arbor (last year)
and hosted a get-together at Zingerman's Next Door for readers of
his books on (topic and topic). In "Get Momentum", he writes with
co-author Jodi Womack about how to get unstuck when you're stuck.

A favorite suggestion is to spend 30 minutes looking 30 days out
in your calendar, to make sure that you don't get surprised by
something on the near event horizon. Jason writes about missing
his father's birthday one year because it snuck up on him, and when
I did this exercise today I realized that I was a month early
to celebrate my sister's birth month. (We don't get too particular
about dates in the family, but it's good to get the greetings into
the correct month).

* Book page
* 30/30 blog post
* Newsletter and mailing list

### Obituary: Charles Gelman

* (Quote from obituary)

### Recipe: Garlic Mustard

Each year on Earth Day, I pull the garlic mustard from my back yard.
This remembers the year after my first son was born when the yard
was overrun with pretty white flowers in the spring. My parents came
to visit, took one look out the back window, and (horrified) went out
wtih gloves and black plastic garbage bags to pull the offending
and noxious weed.

Since then, it's been a tradition on Earth Day to survey the
grounds, pull any garlic mustard I find, and look for trout lilies
and trillium. The weed-pulling ceremony is accompanied by ritual
consumption of part of the bitter harvest. Here's a recipe.

* one bunch garlic mustard, trimmed
* large pot boiling water
* salt

Boil the garlic mustard in a large pot of salted
water until the water turns a shade of green. Strain
out the greens. Bring another pot of water to a boil,
and repeat the boiling process until the water is no
longer discolored.

At this point I generally discard the garlic mustard
into the compost, after taking a ceremonial taste.
The greens contain a cyanide compound, (name), which
contributes both to the bitter taste and the gastric
distress that you might experience if you took the 
greens raw.

Some people tolerate garlic mustard better than others,
even to the point of making a pesto with it and basil.
For me, I can't stand it. 

* AnnArbor.com story, 2010
* Scientific article
* Linda Diane's recipe book
